Course Syllabus for "BIO405: Computational Biology"
---------------------------------------------------

The advent of computers transformed science.  Large, complicated
datasets that once took researchers years to manually analyze could
suddenly be analyzed within a week using computer software.  Nowadays,
scientists can use computers to produce several hypotheses as to how a
particular phenomenon works, create computer models using the parameters
of each hypothesis, input data, and see which hypothetical model
produces an output that most closely mirrors reality. Computational
biology refers to the use of computers to automate data analysis or
model hypotheses in the field of biology.  With computational biology,
researchers apply mathematics to biological phenomena, use computer
programming and algorithms to artificially create or model the
phenomena, and draw from statistics in order to interpret the findings.
 In this course, you will learn the basic principles and procedures of
computational biology.  You will also learn various ways in which you
can apply computational biology to molecular and cellular biology,
biochemistry, neuroscience, evolution, population biology, and behavior.
This course will prepare students in all subfields of biology for future
research and data analysis opportunities.  Computer science students
interested in biological applications will also find it useful.

### Learning Outcomes

Upon completion of this course, students will be able to:

-   Define computational biology and provide examples of how it is used.
-   Describe how networks, algorithms, and models are employed in
    biology.
-   Describe how DNA and proteins are manipulated to generate
    information from sequences and whole genomes.
-   Describe how biological processes can be modeled using computer
    programming.
-   Identify techniques for gathering information on proteins and their
    interactions.
-   Provide examples of the use of mathematics in evolution and
    behavior.
-   Describe the current applications of computational biology.

### Course Requirements

In order to take this course you must:

√    Have access to a computer.

√    Have continuous broadband Internet access.

√    Have the ability/permission to install plug-ins or software (e.g.,
Adobe Reader or Flash).

√    Have the ability to download and save files and documents to a
computer.

√    Have the ability to open Microsoft files and documents (.doc, .ppt,
.xls, etc.).

√    Be competent in the English language.
